URL: https://my.clevelandclinic.org/health/articles/17488-smoking
Length: 5017 characters
--------------------------------------------------
When the smoke reaches your lungs, it travels to the small air sacs (alveoli) and damages them. This can lead toemphysema, a form ofCOPD(chronic obstructive pulmonary disease). From your alveoli, carbon monoxide in the smoke moves into yourblood. It bumps oxygen out of your red blood cells, starving your cells and tissues. The lack of oxygen can make you feelshort of breath. Your cells sound the alarm to let your body know you need more oxygen, but this causes inflammation and mucus to form, making it even harder to breathe. But now we know how harmful smoking is for your health — and for the health of your loved ones around you. Unfortunately, because of nicotine’s relationship with your brain, knowing that cigarettes are dangerous doesn’t make kicking the habit any easier. It can be ful to understand this relationship and know why it’s hard to quit. And remember to be kind to yourself while you do so. Going from smoker to former smoker is a process, and a commitment you make to yourself every day. Narrowed blood vessels in theplacentaand umbilical cord restrict blood flow to the fetus. The blood that does flow through carries carbon monoxide, nicotine and other harmful chemicals. This can prevent the fetus from getting enough oxygen and damage its DNA. Womenwho smoke while they’re pregnantare more likely to have a miscarriage. Babies born to someone who smokes can have low birth weight, heart and lung issues, and developmental delays. How long this takes depends on how long you smoked before quitting and how much damage it did to your lungs. Some issues, like infertility,can start improving quickly. And some damage may never heal — conditions like COPD and pulmonary fibrosis are irreversible. But if you can stop smoking for several years, your risk of cancer and other health conditions reduces or even returns to the same level as someone who doesn’t smoke. In addition to smoking cessation tools, it can be ful to keep in mind how much better you’ll feel in the long run. You may be able to return to activities you used to enjoy, taste and smell foods properly again, protect the health of your loved ones and probably even save some money. Ask for from friends, family and your healthcare providers — let them know the change you’re making and how they can. Yourliverprocesses nicotine and you pee it out within a few hours of smoking a cigarette. Your body misses the buzz and craves more, encouraging you to have another one. If you don’t, you experiencesymptoms of withdrawal, like anxiety,depression, restlessness, anger andinsomnia. Your body will develop a tolerance to nicotine and eventually need more and more to make you feel good, leading tonicotine dependence. The tar coats your throat andvocal cordsas it moves toward your lungs. Traveling through your airways, tar and hydrogen cyanide (a poisonous gas) paralyze your cilia. Like bristles on a broom, cilia are hair-like strands whose job is to trap and sweep germs and other harmful particles out of your lungs. When they’re damaged, you’re more likely to get sick with respiratory infections. It’s no secret that the best way to take care of yourself if you smoke is to quit. But while you’re in the process of quitting, you can your body heal with exercise, and by eating nutritious foods and drinking plenty of water. Whether you currently smoke or no longer do, talk to your healthcare provider getting a routinelung cancer screening. It could catch cancer early and save your life. From your blood, nicotine he to yourbrain. There, it activates receptors that releasedopamine, adrenaline,endorphins,serotoninand other “feel-good” signals in your brain. This is where a nicotine “buzz” comes from. It’s like nicotine pushing buttons to make you more relaxed, content or energized. It’s only been seconds since you inhaled that first puff of smoke. When you take a puff from the cigarette, it goes through a filter. This mostly keeps you from breathing in large particles, but tar, nicotine and other chemicals still get through. The tarstains your teethand coats your gums and tongue. It damages yourtooth enamel, puts you at risk for tooth decay andgum disease, and reduces your ability to taste foods you love. Smoking is the practice of inhaling smoke from burning plant material. Nicotine works on your brain to create a relaxing, pleasurable feeling that makes it tough to quit. But smoking tobacco puts you at risk for cancer, stroke, heart attack, lung disease and other health issues. Nicotine replacements and lifestyle changes may you quit. People have been smoking for social and cultural reasons for centuries. Today, the reasons for smoking aren’t all that different: Having a cigarette might be a routine part of your day — or a way to take a break from it. Care at Cleveland Clinic Cleveland Clinic’s primary care providers offer lifelong medical care. From sinus infections and high blood pressure to preventive screening, we’re here for you. Find a Primary Care Provider Schedule an Appointment