URL: https://www.lung.org/research/sotc/by-the-numbers/10-health-effects-caused-by-smoking
Length: 5584 characters
--------------------------------------------------
10 Health Effects Caused by Smoking You Didn't Know Print Re & Reports State of Tobacco Control By the Numbers 10 Health Effects Caused by Smoking You Didn't Know Section By 1964, it was official: The U.S. Surgeon General confirmed that cigarette smoking causes lung cancer. But in the 60 plus years that followed, we learned that smoking is responsible for many other awful diseases, contributing to the more than 490,000 lives lost to tobacco we face today. Here are some health consequences of smoking you might not have heard before… 1. Going Blind Smoking doesn't do your peepers any good. Smoking increases your risk of age-related macular degeneration , the leading cause of blindness in adults over the age of 65. Type 2 Diabetes Smoking contributes to type 2 diabetes and increases the risk of complications from the disease— including poor blood flow to legs and feet. This can lead to infection and result in the need to amputate a limb. Yep–you could lose your foot or leg! 3. Erectile Dysfunction Male sexual function is affected when you smoke. Tobacco causes narrowing of blood vessels all over your body, including those that supply blood to the penis. Good news is that quitting will make a big difference. Ectopic Pregnancy Ectopic pregnancy is a life-threatening reproductive complication that is more likely in smokers. It occurs when a fertilized egg implants somewhere other than the uterus. The egg can’t survive and it puts the pregnant person's life at serious risk. Hip Fractures People who smoke lose bone density at a faster rate than non-smokers which puts you at risk for breaking body parts like your hip. Putting down the cigarettes can slow down this process and keep you breaking a sweat, not your bones, on the dance floor. Colorectal Cancer Colorectal cancer, which forms in your intestines (colon or rectum), is the second leading cause of cancer deaths in the United States. One of the reasons? Yup, cigarette smoking. Smoking is linked to an increased risk of developing and dying from this type of cancer. Rheumatoid Arthritis Rheumatoid arthritis is a chronic inflammatory disease more common in women that affects the joints in your hands and feet. It causes painful swelling that can eventually result in bone loss and joint deformity. Smoking is one of the causes, and is also associated with developing the disease at an earlier age. Cleft Lip and Cleft Palate These birth defects, commonly called orofacial clefts , occur when a baby’s lip or mouth doesn't develop properly during pregnancy. Women who smoke during pregnancy are more likely to have babies with orofacial clefts. Fertility Issues Parents-to-be take note: Smoking can affect your ability to conceive. It causes reduced fertility in women and can contribute to other problems during pregnancy. Gum Disease As if potentially losing a limb isn’t enough (see #2), you also risk losing your teeth from smoking. Smoking contributes to periodontitis —a gum infection that destroys the bone that s the teeth. It is a major cause of tooth loss in adults. Department of Health and Human Services. The Health Consequences of Smoking–50 Years of Progress: A Report of the Surgeon General , 2014 and U.S Department of Health and Human Services, Eliminating Tobacco-Related Disease and Death: ing Disparities: A Report of the Surgeon General, 2024. Become a Lung Health Insider Join over 700,000 people who receive the latest news lung health, including re, lung disease, air quality, quitting tobacco, inspiring stories and more! For Please leave this field empty GET UPDATES Please enter a valid Thank you! You will now receive updates from the American Lung Association. Page last updated: January 27, 2025 Show A Breath of Fresh Air in Your Inbox Join over 700,000 people who receive the latest news lung health, including re, lung disease, air quality, quitting tobacco, inspiring stories and more! GET UPDATES Thank You! You will now receive updates from the American Lung Association. Show 10 Health Effects Caused by Smoking You Didn't Know Print Re & Reports State of Tobacco Control By the Numbers 10 Health Effects Caused by Smoking You Didn't Know Section By 1964, it was official: The U.S. Show Rheumatoid arthritis is a chronic inflammatory disease more common in women that affects the joints in your hands and feet.It causes painful swelling that can eventually result in bone loss and joint deformity. By 1964, it was official: TheU.S. Colorectal cancer, which forms in your intestines (colon or rectum), is the second leading cause of cancer deaths in the United States. People who smoke losebone densityat a faster rate than non-smokers which puts you at risk for breaking body parts like your hip. Ectopic pregnancyis a life-threatening reproductive complication that is more likely in smokers. Smoking contributes to type 2 diabetesand increases the risk of complications from the disease— including poor blood flow to legs and feet. Yep–you could lose your foot or leg! As if potentially losing a limb isn’t enough (see #2), you also risk losing your teeth from smoking. Thesebirth defects, commonly called orofacial clefts, occur when a baby’s lip or mouth doesn't develop properly during pregnancy. Male sexual function is affected when you smoke. Yep–you could lose your foot or leg! 2. A Breath of Fresh Air in Your Inbox Join over 700,000 people who receive the latest news lung health, including re, lung disease, air quality, quitting tobacco, inspiring stories and more! GET UPDATES Thank You! You will now receive updates from the American Lung Association