URL: https://www.healthline.com/health/smoking/effects-on-body
Length: 9873 characters
--------------------------------------------------
Smoking can cause long-term negative effects on the body, including heart disease, cancer, and diabetes. Smoking is dangerous to your health. It can harm nearly every organ in your body and increase your risk of certain health conditions like glaucoma, cancer, and lung disease. It can also increase inflammation throughout your body and negatively affect your immune system, making you more susceptible to infection. The good news is quitting smoking can reverse many of these effects on your body. the harmful effects of smoking on the body. Cancer risk A well-studied link also exists between smoking and many types of cancer. Smoking can increase Trusted Source your risk of developing cancer almost anywhere in your body. If you quit smoking, the risk of developing most of these types of cancers decreases in 10 to 20 years Trusted Source , depending on the type of cancer. However, your risk will still be higher than that of people who have never smoked. HEALTHLINE Get our weekly COPD Join over 300K rs in receiving guidance on treatment options, managing symptoms, and the latest on condition breakthroughs. Tell us what you're interested in and we'll personalize your. Nicotine is habit-forming and highly addictive. It is one reason why people find it so difficult to quit smoking. Nicotine reaches your brain in seconds and can energize you for a while. But as the effect wears off, you may feel tired and crave more. Physical withdrawal from nicotine can impair Trusted Source your ability to think and increase feelings of anxiety and depression. Vision Smoking long-term can affect your vision and optic nerve. It may lead you to develop certain conditions that affect the eyes. These can include: glaucoma cataracts age-related macular degeneration Respiratory system Smoking damages the airways, air sacs ( alveoli ) in the lungs, and cilia, which are tiny hair-like structures that prevent dirt and mucus from entering your lungs. Lung damage Smoking can cause Trusted Source lung damage and lead to: permanent lung tissue loss a chronic cough damage to the respiratory system increased chance of developing certain infections that affect the lungs, like tuberculosis and pneumonia Cancer risk People who smoke are 20 times Trusted Source more likely than nonsmokers to be diagnosed with lung cancer and are at higher risk Trusted Source for chronic nonreversible lung conditions such as: Keep Your Air Clear: How Tobacco Can Harm Your Lungs | FDA(opens in a new tab) Trusted Source emphysema chronic bronchitis chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) lung cancer adult-onset asthma Withdrawal from tobacco products can cause temporary congestion and respiratory discomfort as your lungs and airways begin to heal. Increased mucus production right after quitting smoking may be a positive sign that your respiratory system is recovering. Share on Pinterest Medical Infographic by Bailey Mariner Cardiovascular system According to the CDC, 1 in 4 deaths Trusted Source in the U.S. result from cardiovascular disease caused by cigarette smoking. Smoking can damage Trusted Source the cardiovascular system, including your: heart arteries blood vessels Nicotine causes blood vessels to tighten, which restricts the flow of blood. Smoking also raises blood pressure , weakens blood vessel walls, and increases your risk of blood clots. This can raise your risk for cardiovascular disease. Secondhand smoke Smoking impacts your cardiovascular health and also affects the health of those around you who don’t smoke. Exposure to secondhand smoke carries the same risk to a nonsmoker as someone who does smoke. Integumentary system (skin, hair, and nails) Smoking cigarettes can affect your skin, hair, and nails. Skin Substances in tobacco smoke can change the structure of your skin. This may contribute Trusted Source to: premature skin damage associated with aging wrinkles delayed wound healing developing hidradenitis suppurativa developing psoriasis developing certain types of skin cancer Smoking can also increase Trusted Source the risk of developing squamous cell carcinoma (skin cancer) on the lips. Hair There’s also a link Trusted Source between smoking and androgenic alopecia, a condition that causes hair loss in males. Smoking causes hair loss due to: vasoconstriction DNA damage generation of free radicals hormonal effects Nails It may also affect your fingernails and toenails and increase the likelihood of fungal nail infections. Digestive system Cigarette smoking can affect the digestive system in multiple ways. Cancer risk Smoking increases Trusted Source the risk of cancer in the organs of the digestive system. This can include cancer of the: mouth throat larynx esophagus stomach pancreas colon and rectum Type 2 diabetes Smoking also has an effect on insulin, making it more likely that you’ll develop insulin resistance. People who smoke cigarettes have a 30% to 40% Trusted Source greater risk of developing type 2 diabetes and its complications. Type 2 diabetes tends to develop faster in people who smoke than people who do not smoke, as it may be harder to control. Periodontal disease Smoking can raise your risk Trusted Source for periodontal disease or disease affecting the gums. This happens because smoking causes inflammation around the teeth and increases your risk for bacterial infections. The gums may become swollen and bleed (gingivitis) and eventually begin to pull away from the teeth (periodontitis). Quitting smoking The good news is that quitting smoking can reduce many risk factors for the conditions and diseases mentioned above. If you smoke and are thinking quitting, visit our smoking cessation resource center , which has tips for how to stop smoking, information on smoking cessation therapies, and more. In infants, children, and teens Smoking while pregnant may cause Trusted Source babies to be born with underdeveloped lungs. Children whose parents or caregivers smoke cigarettes may also experience certain health conditions at a higher rate than children whose caregivers do not smoke. These can include: coughing wheezing asthma attacks pneumonia tuberculosis bronchitis Takeaway Smoking cigarettes increases your risk for health conditions that can affect the whole body. But quitting smoking reduces many of these risks. It also has both short and long-term benefits. Since smoking affects every body system, finding a way to quit can you live a longer and healthier life. Withdrawal from tobacco products can cause temporary congestion and respiratory discomfort as your lungs and airways begin to heal. Smoking also has an effect on insulin, making it more likely that you’ll developinsulin resistance. Smoking impacts your cardiovascular health and also affects the health of those around you who don’t smoke. People who smoke are20 timesTrusted Sourcemore likely than nonsmokers to be diagnosed with lung cancer and are athigher riskTrusted Sourcefor chronic nonreversible lung conditions such as: If you smoke and are thinking quitting, visit oursmoking cessation resource center, which has tips for how to stop smoking, information on smoking cessation therapies, and more. These can include: Health News All Can 6-6-6 Walking Workout You Lose Weight? This Couple Lost 118 Pounds Together Without Medication 5 Science-Backed Ways to Live a Longer Life Morning Coffee May You Live Longer ‘Weekend Warrior’ Workouts for Your 2025 Fitness Goals This Just In 5 Tips for a Healthy Lifestyle How to Disinfect Your House After the Flu Best Vegan and Plant-Based Meal Delivery for 2025 Does Medicare Cover Pneumonia Shots? Chromosomes, Genetics, and Your Health If you quit smoking, the risk of developing most of these types of cancers decreases in 10 to 20 years Trusted Source , depending on the type of cancer. Join over 300K rs in receiving guidance on treatment options, managing symptoms, and the latest on condition breakthroughs. Smoking can raise your risk Trusted Source for periodontal disease or disease affecting the gums. The good news is that quitting smoking can reduce many risk factors for the conditions and diseases mentioned above. 7 More Reasons to Quit Smoking Medically reviewed by Justin Choi, MD You know cigarette smoking causes lung cancer and heart disease. You know it yellows your teeth and wrinkles your skin. But what are the other reasons… How to Remove Cigarette Smell from You, Your Clothes, Your Car, and Medically reviewed by Debra Sullivan, Ph.D., MSN, R.N., CNE, COI Known as thirdhand smoke, the cigarette odor that clings to clothing, skin, hair, your breath, and your environment contains active chemical… What You Need to Know Smoking and Your Brain Medically reviewed by Nancy Hammond, M.D. Smoking can have many effects on your brain. Apart from addiction to nicotine, smoking can also increase your risk for brain diseases, including… How Is a Smoker's Lung Different from a Healthy Lung? Medically reviewed by Timothy J. Legg, PhD, PsyD You know that smoking is bad for your lungs, but what does that mean? Here's what you need to know the smoker's lung vs. HHS Cuts Programs That People Quit Smoking: What Are the Health Impacts? The HHS has gutted key programs that people quit smoking, including the CDC's Office on Smoking and Health. Experts say the federal cuts could… HHS Cuts Programs That People Quit Smoking: What Are the Health Impacts? The HHS has gutted key programs that people quit smoking, including the CDC's Office on Smoking and Health. Experts say the federal cuts could… Vaping Not Effective for Smoking Cessation. Here's What Will Instead A new study found that vaping nicotine is not an effective way to quit smoking cigarettes. People who vape and smoke cigarettes are less likely to… Vaping Not Effective for Smoking Cessation. But quitting can reverse some of this damage, even if you’ve smoked for several years