URL: https://www.indianhealthyrecipes.com/aloo-bhindi/
Length: 12683 characters
--------------------------------------------------
Aloo Bhindi is a delicious Indian side dish of stir fried okra with potatoes, spices and herbs. This flavorsome North Indian dish is simple, easy to make and goes well with steamed rice, roti, parathas, chapati or any flatbre. Aloo Bhindi is one of those comforting dishes that require just a handful of ingredients but turns out so good that you won’t stop making it again & again. Jump To Recipe 195 shares Aloo Bhindi It is said that Aloo Bhindi originated in the Punjabi Cuisine but today you can find it being made and enjoyed all over India with regional variations. It is a common dish made in the s and often served in restaurants in a North Indian thali (meal). Basically it is a dry curry, also known as sabzi and it does not have any sauce. The most basic version is made with just okra, potatoes, chili powder, amchur (dried mango powder) and a sprinkle of garam masala. Many people also use onions, tomatoes, ginger, garlic and plenty of other ground spices. You will also find cooks like me experimenting with curry leaves and mustard seeds. Each variation brings a new dimension to the aloo bhindi. I make this in 2 ways – one is to add potatoes in this Bhindi Masala which yields a little sauce. I’m sharing the second one in this post and also sharing many tried and tested variations below. If you love making tangy, spicy and sweet curry with bhindi, check out this Okra Curry. At we love bhindi and this one makes to our often. It is a kids’ friendly recipe and you can make it less hot/spicy to suit their palate. Here I have not used onions just to save 20 mins time but if you want you can use them. Tomatoes are optional and you may leave them out if you want and simply use amchur or lemon juice for the tang. Here is the picture of the same, made without onions and tomatoes. My family prefers Aloo Bhindi with tomatoes because they impart tang, adds so much flavor and keeps the dish a little moist without drying out. However you can still leave them out to save 8 to 10 minutes of your time. More similar recipes, Sauteed Okra Bhindi Fry Aloo Gobi Aloo Matar Eggplant Potato Curry Bhindi Do Pyaza Photo Guide How to Make Aloo Bhindi (Stepwise Photos) This recipes serves 4. If you want to make 2 servings, cut down the quantities by half. Rinse 1.1 lb (½ kg) bhindi under running water and pat dry or air dry until all of the moisture from the surface is gone. Water droplets on the okra can make your sabzi more slimy while cooking. Rinse and peel 320 grams (3 medium) potatoes and rinse 2 small tomatoes (150 grams). Dice the potatoes to ¾ inch pieces and add them to a bowl of water as you dice. If you want you can also rinse them well and pour fresh water. This removes the excess starch and prevents them from sticking to each other. Chop the bhindi to ¾ to 1 inch pieces. You can also do this while you stir fry the potatoes. Pour 1 to 1½ tablespoon oil to a wide pan and heat it. Remove the potatoes from water and add them here. Spread them to a single layer and let them fry on a medium high heat. While you fry these you may chop the bhindi and slice 4 medium garlic cloves to make 1 to 1½ tablespoons. Or use 1 inch ginger peeled and sliced. Stir them and cook until they are fork tender, meaning fully cooked. Remove these to a plate and keep aside. To the same pan add another 1½ tablespoon oil and add the sliced garlic cloves. Add the bhindi and fry them on a medium heat until all the slime has gone and they are cooked. Stir them every few minutes but do not over do as the okra can release more slime. You may leave out the tomatoes and use amchur or lemon juice later. While the bhindi is frying, quarter 2 medium tomatoes and add them to a grinder. Using more tomatoes is likely going to make the dish mushy because you need to cook longer to evaporate the moisture in tomatoes. When the bhindi is done they looked wilted and shrunk. Add the aloo and the following spices: ⅛ teaspoon turmeric (optional, add more if you want) ¾ to 1 teaspoon Kashmiri red chili powder (adjust to taste, I use 2 teaspoons) ¾ to 1½ teaspoon garam masala (adjust to taste or ½ tsp cumin & 1 tsp coriander powder, use ¾ to 1 teaspoon if you don’t use tomatoes) ⅓ teaspoon salt (more if you use tomatoes) 11. Mix and stir fry for 2 to 3 minutes. Move the veggies aside and make a well in the center. Pour the tomato puree (½ to ¾ cup, no more) and let it cook (without mixing) on a medium high heat until most of the moisture is reduced. Mix and stir fry on a medium high heat until the raw smell of tomatoes is gone. This takes me another 4 to 5 mins. If you cook on a low heat at this stage your bhindi can become mushy. Taste test and add more salt, garam masala or red chili powder to suit your liking. Add 1 tablespoon kasuri methi (dried fenugreek leaves). If you left our tomatoes, then add 1 teaspoon amchur or add lemon juice while serving. Optionally garnish aloo bhindi with 1 tablespoon coriander leaves. Serve hot with steamed rice, roti, chapati or any flatbre. Pro Tips Wipe dry the bhindi to prevent them turning more slimy. Chop the bhindi to medium sized pieces. If they are too thin, they will let out too much slime. If they are too large, you will take a lot of time to cook them and sometimes you can feel the slime inside while eating. Make sure the slime has gone completely before adding tomatoes because any kind of moisture is likely to make the bhindi slimy. Tomatoes are used in the pureed form to cook them faster. Though chopped tomatoes work, they take longer to cook down and loose the raw flavor. Variations To use onions, slice one large onion and start by sautéing the onions in 2 tablespoons oil, followed by garlic or 2 teaspoons ginger garlic paste and then bhindi. Use tomatoes the same way as shown in the recipe. Another method is to make the onion tomato masala and then add the fried bhindi and aloo. You may check out this bhindi masala for that. Give a South Indian touch to this aloo bhindi by using curry leaves. You can also add Idli podi, peanut podi, dry garlic chutney (vada pav chutney), flax seed podi or fresh/frozen coconut. This version tastes better without tomatoes. I have shared it here on Vendakkai Fry. Sprinkle as much as you like towards the end. Use less salt while cooking the bhindi if using podi because it is already salted. But note that the dish is going to turn out dry. Related Recipes Okra Curry Sauteed Okra Reci... Aloo Gobi Recipe Bhindi Do Pyaza Bhindi Ki Sabji |... Recipe Card Aloo Bhindi Recipe (Okra With Potatoes) 5 from 16 votes Aloo Bhindi is a simple Indian dish of potatoes and okra stir fried together with spices and tomatoes. This spicy, tangy and super flavorful dish is delicious and healthy. Serve it as a side with rice, quinoa, roti or any kind of flatbre. Cook Mode Prevent your screen from going dark Print Recipe Pin Recipe 1x 2x 3x For best results follow the step-by-step photos above the recipe card Prep Time 15 minutes minutes Cook Time 25 minutes minutes Total Time 40 minutes minutes Servings 4 Author Swasthi Diet : Gluten Free, Vegan Ingredients (US cup = 240ml ) ▢ 1.1 lb (½ kg) bhindi /okra ▢ ¾ lb. (320 grams) potatoes /aloo ▢ 2 small (150 grams) tomatoes pureed (½ cup puree or 1 teaspoon amchur or 1½ tbsp lemon juice) ▢ 4 medium (1½ tablespoon) garlic cloves sliced or use 1 inch ginger, peeled & sliced ▢ 3 tablespoons oil (divided) ▢ ⅛ teaspoon turmeric (optional) ▢ ¾ to 1 teaspoon Kashmiri red chili powder (adjust to taste, I use 2 teaspoons) ▢ ¾ to 1½ teaspoon garam masala (adjust to taste, I use 1½ teaspoons) ▢ ⅓ teaspoon salt (more to adjust) ▢ 1 tablespoon kasuri methi (dried fenugreek leaves) ▢ 1 tablespoon coriander leaves to garnish Instructions Preparation ▢ Rinse okra, potatoes and tomatoes under running water. Pat dry the okra or leave aside to air dry to remove any surface moisture. ▢ Peel and dice/chop potatoes to ¾ inch pieces and add them to a bowl of water as you dice. ▢ Pour half of the oil to a hot pan. Remove the potatoes from water and add them to the hot pan. ▢ Spread them to a single layer and let them cook on a medium heat. Keep stirring every few minutes to fry/cook them evenly, until fork tender but not mushy. ▢ While the potatoes fry, chop okra to ¾ to 1 inch pieces and slice the garlic cloves. ▢ When the potatoes are fork tender, remove them to a plate. How to Make Aloo Bhindi ▢ Pour the rest of the oil to the pan and add the sliced garlic. Fry for 30 seconds and add the okra. Spread them in the pan and let cook on a medium heat until all of the slime has vanished & they are almost cooked. ▢ While they fry, stir them every few minutes so they cook evenly. Overdoing this can make them more slimy. Optionally- add the quartered tomatoes to a small grinder/blender and puree them. ▢ When the bhindi is almost cooked, add the potatoes, red chili powder, turmeric, salt and garam masala (or cumin & coriander powder). Stir fry for 2 to 3 minutes on a medium heat. ▢ If using tomatoes, move the veggies aside & pour the puree to the base of the pan in the center. Increase the heat to medium high and let cook without stirring, until most of the moisture from tomatoes is gone. ▢ Mix the tomatoes well with the rest of the veggies and continue to saute for a few more minutes until the raw smell of tomatoes has gone completely, for 4 to 5 minutes. ▢ Taste test and add more salt or chili or garam masala at this stage to suit your liking. Add kasuri methi and amchur (if not using tomatoes) and mix well. ▢ Serve Aloo Bhindi with rice, quinoa, roti or with any flatbre of choice. Notes Use lesser spices if you don’t use tomatoes. More spices are required if you use tomatoes. You can use 2 to 3 small tomatoes (½ to ¾ cup pureed tomatoes) for half kg bhindi. Using more tomatoes is likely to overcook your okra and make them mushy. NUTRITION INFO (estimation only) Nutrition Facts Aloo Bhindi Recipe (Okra With Potatoes) Amount Per Serving Calories 150 Calories from Fat 99 % Daily Value* Fat 11g 17% Saturated Fat 1g 6% Trans Fat 0.04g Polyunsaturated Fat 3g Monounsaturated Fat 7g Sodium 215mg 9% Potassium 491mg 14% Carbohydrates 12g 4% Fiber 5g 21% Sugar 3g 3% Protein 3g 6% Vitamin A 1381IU 28% Vitamin C 35mg 42% Calcium 116mg 12% Iron 1mg 6% * Percent Daily Values are based on a 2000 calorie diet. Tried this recipe? Mention @SwasthisRecipes or tag #swasthisrecipes ! Swasthi’s Recipes 195 shares Meat Recipes Swasthi I’m Swasthi Shreekanth, the recipe developer, food photographer & food writer behind Swasthi’s Recipes. My aim is to you cook great Indian food with my time-tested recipes. After 2 decades of experience in practical Indian cooking I started this blog to people cook better & more often at. Whether you are a novice or an experienced cook I am sure Swasthi’s Recipes will assist you to enhance your cooking skills. More me Follow Swasthi’s Recipes Pinterest Please leave this field empty to receive awesome Swasthi's Recipes in your inbox * Check your inbox or spam folder to confirm your subscription. Comments 5 from 16 votes ( 12 ratings without comment ) Label Recipe Rating Recipe Rating Name* * Label Recipe Rating Recipe Rating Name* * 8 Comments Inline Feedbacks View all comments Jen September 22, 2023 3:22 pm Made aloo bhindi for the first time and it was delicious. Thank you this goes to our rotation and hopefully it turns out good with frozen okra too. Reply swasthi Reply to Jen September 24, 2023 12:47 am Glad you like it Jen. Yes it can be made with frozen okra. Just pat dry the okra first Reply Pradip Madgaonkar August 2, 2023 9:33 am Wow … I love bhendi I want to try this dish … Thank you For this Recipe. Reply swasthi Reply to Pradip Madgaonkar August 3, 2023 1:52 pm Hope you like it. Thank you Reply Hema June 29, 2023 1:37 pm This is a lovely recipe. Made this for the first time and it turns out very good. Used tomatoes and chaat masala too. Reply swasthi Reply to Hema August 3, 2023 1:51 pm Chaat masala sounds good Hema. Reply Veda June 28, 2023 2:31 pm Thank you. I made aloo bhindi using your recipe. Came out good and we all like it. Reply swasthi Reply to Veda July 30, 2023 9:49 am Glad you like it Veda. Thank you Reply Aloo Bhindi is a delicious Indian side dish of stir fried okra with potatoes, spices and herbs. I’m Swasthi Shreekanth, the recipe developer, food photographer & food writer behind Swasthi’s Recipes. Aloo Bhindi is a simple Indian dish of potatoes and okra stir fried together with spices and tomatoes. Pour the rest of the oil to the pan and add the sliced garlic. If using tomatoes, move the veggies aside & pour the puree to the base of the pan in the center. Use lesser spices if you don’t use tomatoes