URL: https://hebbarskitchen.com/aloo-bhindi-recipe-bhindi-aloo-ki-sabji/
Length: 6652 characters
--------------------------------------------------
aloo bhindi recipe | bhindi aloo ki sabji with detailed photo and video recipe. an easy and simple north indian dry curry or sabzi recipe made with potatoes, okra’s and dry spices. this recipe is not a premium selection and is made on day to day basis for lunch and dinner. also it is served mainly with indian flat bread, but also tastes great when served as a side with dal rice combination. Table of Contents hide 1 aloo bhindi video recipe: 2 recipe card for bhindi aloo ki sabji recipe: 3 Ingredients 1x2x3x 4 how to make aloo bhindi with step by step photo: 5 notes: aloo bhindi recipe | bhindi aloo ki sabji with step by step photo and video recipe. north indian cuisine has a lot to offer both in the premium, classical and also in the day to day, less fancy categories. generally the premium one’s takes the top spot and are more popular among other regions and states of india, without much emphasis on later one. one such easy and simple less fancy dry curry recipe is aloo bhindi recipe, known for its simplicity and taste. there are several dry curry or sabji recipes i have posted till now. but this recipe of bhindi aloo recipe is very unique and also more tastier compared to other north indian dry variants. the main reason being the choice of vegetables used in this recipe. the combination of okra with potatoes is very unique. one being soft and the other being hard and solid. moreover, it is easier to cook okra as compared to potatoes and hence you would get a final product which is a combination of soft and crispy textured curry. i personally like dry curry as it is not just easy and simple to make, but also has other benefits. for instance, you can use the leftover dry curries for snacks like sandwich or kathi roll / frankie. in addition the other advantage is that you can also serve it with rice as a side and not just limited to roti/paratha. furthermore, some easy and important tips, suggestions and variations for a perfect and tasty aloo bhindi recipe. firstly, as i explained earlier, the potatoes may take longer time to cook, compared to bhindi. hence i would recommend to make it thin or small cubes so that it does not take long time cook. secondly, you need to take extra care while chopping and handling okra. do not bring it to the of moisture/water while chopping or cooking. it would release its latex when it is brought in with water. lastly, you can make the same recipe as a creamy gravy based curry. you can extend the same vegetable choice with onion and tomato based sauce to make it gravy curry. finally, I request you to check my other dry curry recipes collection with this post of aloo bhindi recipe. it mainly includes recipes like, kaju paneer masala , white kurma , shahi paneer , beans ki sabji , aloo chole , baby potato fry , paneer hyderabadi , lasooni palak , corn capsicum masala , biryani gravy. further to these I would also like to mention my other similar recipes collection like, paneer recipes rice recipes paratha recipes aloo bhindi video recipe: Must Read: sweets recipes Gulab Jamun Recipe – Soft with... paneer recipes Matar Paneer Pulao Recipe | Kaju... starters or entree Cheesy Garlic Bread Recipe – Dominos... 00:02:12 dal recipes Dal Makhani Recipe Restaurant Style in... curry recipes Matar Paneer Recipe | Dhaba Style... paneer recipes Dahi Ke Kabab Recipe | Hung... recipe card for bhindi aloo ki sabji recipe: aloo bhindi recipe | bhindi aloo ki sabji | aloo bhindi fry HEBBARS KITCHEN easy aloo bhindi recipe | bhindi aloo ki sabji | aloo bhindi fry 5 from 239 votes Tweet Share Print Recipe Pin Recipe Save Recipe Saved! Prep Time 5 minutes mins Cook Time 15 minutes mins Total Time 20 minutes mins Course sabzi Cuisine north india Servings 3 Servings Ingredients 1x 2x 3x for roasting: ▢ 2 tbsp oil ▢ 2 aloo , sliced ▢ 10 bhindi / okra , chopped for sabzi: ▢ 3 tsp oil ▢ 1 tsp cumin / jeera ▢ ½ onion , sliced ▢ 1 tsp ginger garlic paste ▢ ¼ tsp turmeric ▢ 1 tsp kashmiri red chilli powder ▢ ¼ tsp cumin powder ▢ 1 tsp coriander powder ▢ 1 tsp aamchur / dry mango powder ▢ ¼ tsp garam masala ▢ ½ tsp salt ▢ 1 tsp kasuri methi , crushed Instructions firstly, in a large kadai heat 2 tbsp oil and roast 2 potato. roast on medium flame until it turns golden and crisp. now in the same oil, add in bhindi. roast on medium flame without burning. now keep the crispy bhindi aside. in the same kadai heat 3 tsp oil and saute 1 tsp cumin until it turns aromatic. add in ½ onion, 1 tsp ginger garlic paste and saute well. saute until it turns golden brown. keeping the flame on low, add ¼ tsp turmeric, 1 tsp chilli powder, ¼ tsp cumin powder, 1 tsp coriander powder, 1 tsp aamchur, ¼ tsp garam masala and ½ tsp salt. saute on low flame until it turns aromatic. mix well making sure all the spices are well coated. now add 1 tsp kasuri methi and mix gently. finally, aloo bhindi recipe tastes great as a side dish with roti or rice. Tried this recipe? Mention @HebbarsKitchen or tag #hebbarskitchen ! how to make aloo bhindi with step by step photo: firstly, in a large kadai heat 2 tbsp oil and roast 2 potato. notes: firstly, make sure to roast aloo and bhindi on medium flame until it turns golden and crispy. also, you can add lemon juice in place of aamchur for tanginess. additionally, chop the bhindi once dried completely else it may turn sticky if there is moisture. finally, aloo bhindi recipe tastes great when served hot and spicy. !! Drop your and get recipes to your mailbox!! Thank you! You have successfully joined our r list. Related Recipes diwali snacks Moong Dal Chakli Recipe | Pasi Paruppu Murukku Hebbars Kitchen - August 11, 2025 breakfast recipes Puliyogare Recipe | Tamarind Rice – Karnataka Style Hebbars Kitchen - August 8, 2025 curry recipes Paneer Ki Sabji | Dhaba Style Instant Paneer... Hebbars Kitchen - August 5, 2025 00:01:46 gluten free Coconut Burfi Recipe | Nariyal Barfi | Thengai... Hebbars Kitchen - July 31, 2025 00:01:08 instant recipes Punugulu Recipe with Leftover Idli Dosa Batter Hebbars Kitchen - July 30, 2025 curry recipes Paneer Butter Masala Recipe – Restaurant Style Hebbars Kitchen - July 29, 2025 breakfast recipes Ragi Roti Recipe – Ragi Rotti | Nachni... Hebbars Kitchen - July 28, 2025 diwali sweets Energy Bar Recipe | Protein Bar – Dry... Hebbars Kitchen - July 17, 2025 5 from 239 votes ( 239 ratings without comment ) aloo bhindi recipe | bhindi aloo ki sabji with detailed photo and video recipe. Hebbars Kitchen - July 17, 2025 aloo bhindi recipe | bhindi aloo ki sabji with detailed photo and video recipe. Hebbars Kitchen - July 17, 2025 there are several dry curry or sabji recipes i have posted till now