URL: https://www.cnet.com/tech/services-and-software/what-is-perplexity-heres-everything-you-need-to-know-about-this-ai-chatbot/
Length: 15197 characters
--------------------------------------------------
Rick Osterloh Talks Gemini and Google's AI Future at the Made by Google Event Rick Osterloh Talks Gemini and Google's AI Future at the Made by Google Event Click to unmute Video Player is. Play Video Pause Skip Backward Skip Forward Next playlist item Unmute Current Time 0:00 / Duration 4:12 Loaded : 0% 0:00 Stream Type LIVE Seek to live, currently behind live LIVE Remaining Time - 4:12 1x Playback Rate Chapters Chapters Descriptions descriptions off , selected Captions captions settings , opens captions settings dialog captions off , selected en-US Share Audio Track en-US (Main) , selected Fullscreen This is a modal window. Escape will cancel and close the window. Text Color White Black Red Green Blue Yellow Magenta Cyan Opacity Opaque Semi-Transparent Text Background Color Black White Red Green Blue Yellow Magenta Cyan Opacity Opaque Semi-Transparent Transparent Caption Area Background Color Black White Red Green Blue Yellow Magenta Cyan Opacity Transparent Semi-Transparent Opaque Font Size 50% 75% 100% 125% 150% 175% 200% 300% 400% Text Edge Style None Raised Depressed Uniform Drop shadow Font Family Proportional Sans-Serif Monospace Sans-Serif Proportional Serif Monospace Serif Casual Script Small Caps Reset Done Close Modal Dialog End of dialog window. Close Modal Dialog This is a modal window. This modal can be closed by pressing the Escape key or activating the close button. ai atlas Tech Services & Software AI What Is Perplexity? Here's Everything You Need to Know This AI Chatbot We take you through what exactly Perplexity is, how it works, what sets it apart from ChatGPT and other gen AI tools -- and some of the legal battles it's facing. Barbara Pazur Contributor Barbara is a tech writer specializing in AI and emerging technologies. With a background as a systems librarian in software development, she brings a unique perspective to her reporting. Having lived in the USA and Ireland, Barbara now resides in Croatia. She covers the latest in artificial intelligence and tech innovations. Her work draws on years of experience in tech and other fields, blending technical know-how with a passion for how technology shapes our world. See full bio Barbara Pazur July 2, 2025 2:25 p.m. PT 8 min read Perplexity AI was founded in August 2022. James Martin/CNET engines hadn't changed much in a very long time -- until AI entered the scene. Perplexity is one of the artificial intelligence platforms trying to reshape how we find answers online by skipping the list of links and delivering direct, conversational results. Unlike traditional Google , which sends you off to other sites, Perplexity tries to be the site. You can use it on the web or its free app for Android , iOS , Mac and Windows. Perplexity AI was founded in August 2022 by Aravind Srinivas (formerly a re scientist at OpenAI), Denis Yarats (with experience at AI Re), Johnny Ho (ex-Quora engineer) and Andy Konwinski (a Databricks co-founder). In a short time, it has grown from a scrappy startup into a fast-evolving generative AI tool with pro features and an agentic AI shopping assistant that can make purchases on your behalf. It's part engine, part chatbot and it's changing how people for information. Perplexity has become especially popular among students, reers and tech-savvy users who want fast, reliable answers without having to dig through multiple sites. It has amassed 22 million active users across its website and app, while its mobile app has been ed 13.9 million times since its launch. Read on to find out what exactly Perplexity is, how it works, what sets it apart from ChatGPT and other generative AI tools -- and some of the legal battles it's been facing. What is Perplexity? Perplexity calls itself the world's first "answer engine" that uses large language models to understand and give you direct, detailed responses to your questions. It es the web in real time and, instead of showing you a list of blue links, it pulls info from what should be trusted sources (though Reddit often finds itself on that list) and summarizes the information into clear, up-to-date answers in natural language. The company also encourages you to double-check the sources, which, considering how often we have seen AI tools hallucinate , should be your default practice by now. Interestingly, Perplexity was the first generative AI tool whose results came with citations. Now, ChatGPT, Google's Gemini and even Claude (because it can access the internet) are adding citations with deep re features. As OpenAI and Google push their premium re tools behind paywalls, Perplexity has joined the deep re race with a more accessible option. The feature breaks down complex questions into smaller subtasks, pulls from academic papers, technical sources and long-form articles and compiles it all into a detailed report, often in just a few minutes. So it's slightly faster at generating results than most competitors. Rob Howard , an AI consultant and founder of the education platform Innovating with AI , thinks highly of these advancements. "Deep re is the first tool that really changes my job," Howard told me. "The core idea of 'go read 600 articles in 10 minutes and give me the highlights and then link me to them' is just incredibly valuable for so many people. And it's kind of like having an army of interns or an army of re assistants working with you, for a very low price." What can Perplexity do? Perplexity answers questions like "What is quantum computing?" and "What's the best time to visit Japan?" You can follow up with additional questions or refine your query like you would in a chat. Similarly to Google's "People also ask" section when you , you can expand on the topic with an offered set of questions under the Related section at the bottom of the page. Perplexity / Screenshot by CNET CNET's staff chose Perplexity as the best chatbot for re , which is what most people use it for, but it can also: Summarize long articles or documents. Explain complex topics in plain language. Offer comparisons and pros/cons lists. Perform internal knowledge on uploaded files like PDFs, Word docs and Excel sheets (Pro and Enterprise users only). Look up real-time stock prices and financial data (data is sourced via Financial Modeling Prep API). If you're a Perplexity Pro r in the US, the "Buy with Pro" feature handles your shopping request from start to finish. It selects a product based on your preferences, completes the purchase using your saved details and, for a limited time, even offers free shipping. Perplexity also introduced a voice assistant for iOS , offering hands-free answers at a time when Apple was still holding off on its own AI features. Another new release is Perplexity Labs , an agentic AI feature that lets you build full projects -- think reports, dashboards and spreheets -- just by typing out what you need in plain language. It handles everything from reing online to writing and running code, creating charts and organizing the results in one place. Labs is available to Pro users on Perplexity's mobile and web apps, with desktop coming soon. While Deep Re is built for faster, well-cited answers, Labs is better suited for longer, more complex tasks where the goal is to produce something usable, not just informative. Most projects take 10 minutes or more to complete. How is Perplexity different from ChatGPT and Google ? Traditional Google crawls the web and ranks results. ChatGPT can generate content and answer questions based on its training data and real-time web results. Perplexity combines both approaches: It retrieves current information from the web and uses AI to summarize it. Similarly, Google's AI Overviews now show AI-generated results above standard results. Perplexity, as previously mentioned, is known for a consistent and prominent display of source citations for every piece of information it provides. Other AI tools will give citations on demand. Another distinguishable feature is that other gen AI applications prioritize open-ended conversation or creative content generation, like images and videos. Until recently, Perplexity was unable to do that, but since the end of April, it can now create images. you can generate images on perplexity now. we have also added for grok 3 and o4-mini for model selection options (which already s gemini 2.5 pro, claude 3.7, perplexity sonar, gpt-4.1, deepseek r1 1776), and looking into ing o3 as… pic..com/RX6L98pf2g — Aravind Srinivas (@AravSrinivas) April 25, 2025 I tried creating something simple and fun to test it, and it turns out that images in Perplexity and ChatGPT are very similar, despite ChatGPT's dog having five legs (ha). It comes as no surprise, given Perplexity uses OpenAI's image generation models similar to those used by ChatGPT. Images generated by ChatGPT (left) and Perplexity (right) of a cartoon-style dog. Perplexity / Screenshot by CNET While Perplexity can assist with debugging and writing smaller code snippets, it will not be most users' go-to tool for coding. ChatGPT or GitHub Copilot are better for that. The company is now developing Comet , a next-generation agentic AI web browser. It is built on Chromium and integrates Perplexity's conversational engine directly into the browser. You can join a waitlist ahead of the beta release, which recently began for Apple Silicon Mac users. Perplexity / Screenshot by CNET Pricing and plans Like most similar tools, Perplexity offers freemium pricing. It is free to use (forever, it says), with a Standard plan that includes unlimited basic es, a limited number of queries using more advanced models and three image generations per day. The $20 per month Pro plan grants you access to the latest models like OpenAI's GPT-4o (Omni), Anthropic's Claude 4.0 Sonnet, Google's Gemini 2.5 Pro, xAI's Grok 3 Beta and Perplexity's own Sonar Large. It s file uplo and unlimited image generation, and includes a monthly API credit. It also offers perks where you can get various offerings and savings from travel, wellness and finance brands. Businesses can choose an Enterprise tier, starting at $40 per user per month, with enhanced security, custom model tuning and team collaboration features. There is also custom pricing for large organizations. In July, Perplexity additionally introduced a $200-per-month ($2,000-per-year) plan called Perplexity Max , which includes unlimited labs, early access to new features, the top-tier AI models like OpenAI's o3-pro and Claude Opus 4 , as well as priority from Perplexity. Merges, collaborations and integrations In its attempt to reduce its reliance on Google, Samsung reportedly is close to g a major deal with Perplexity AI that would bring its AI-powered features to Galaxy smarts , including the upcoming S26. The deal would also reportedly include a financial investment from Samsung and deeper integration of Perplexity into apps like Samsung Internet and Bixby. This would be Perplexity's biggest mobile partnership after recently teaming up with Motorola. Perplexity is eyeing deeper integrations beyond smarts. Srinivas recently hinted at a potential Firefox integration in a post on X and Mozilla's Connect forum further fueled speculation, though nothing official has been confirmed. The company was also in early talks to buy half of TikTok's US operations after a federal ban was put on hold. Perplexity announced new partnerships in May with Statista, PitchBook and Wiley. While free users get limited access, Pro and Enterprise rs receive more monthly es using these premium sources. The goal is to provide information that was once reserved for professionals with costly subscriptions, like doctors or financial analysts, and make it accessible to everyday users. Rumor has it that Apple is in talks with Perplexity , either to acquire the company or partner with it to develop an AI engine Perplexity, and possibly integrate its technology into Siri. A Perplexity spokesperson dismissed reports of a potential merger or acquisition. Lawsuits and other controversies Perplexity's rapid growth has also drawn legal heat. It all started in June 2024, when Forbes accused Perplexity of using its original reporting without proper credit and issued a legal threat. 2, 2024, The New York Times sent a cease-and-desist letter to Perplexity, alleging unlawful use of its ed content. 21, Dow Jones (The Wall Street Journal's publisher) and NYP Holdings (The New York Post's publisher) filed a joint lawsuit against Perplexity , accusing it of "massive illegal copying" and infringement by repackaging their content. The BBC also threatened to sue Perplexity over unauthorized use of its content, adding to the growing list of media organizations pushing back. When asked the lawsuits, Perplexity declined to comment other than to describe the BBC allegations as "manipulative and opportunistic." The BBC declined to comment further, saying it had nothing to add beyond what was reported in the Financial Times. Howard told CNET that today's laws, in the US and globally, are already struggling to keep up with the internet, let alone the rapid rise of AI. Unfortunately for the creators, with Anthropic winning the lawsuit over its use of ed books to train AI, the decision may have opened a Pandora's box for similar rulings to follow. "What the AI companies have done is essentially just ask for forgiveness rather than permission," Howard said. "What we're seeing instead is they're basically negotiating settlements where it's like, OK, you can use our stuff, but you have to pay us." This is exactly what Perplexity tried to do, facing the pressure. The company has launched a revenue-sharing Publishers Program that lets approved outlets earn money when their work is cited inside the answer engine. Publishers like TIME, Fortune, Der Spiegel, Entrepreneur, The Texas Tribune and WordPress.com have already signed on. Is Perplexity worth using? People are turning to AI for re en masse. If you're looking for fast, conversational answers with real sources, Perplexity is one of the best tools available today. It's especially useful for re-heavy tasks where you'd normally click through a dozen tabs. It's not perfect but for everyday questions or as a second opinion alongside Google or ChatGPT, it's a good tool to use. The company says it logs use and may store prompts for re and improvement purposes, although there's an option to use "incognito mode" for private es or opt out completely in settings. Go to the "AI Data Retention" option under the Account section, and switch the toggle to "off." This will prevent Perplexity from using your interactions for AI training. engines hadn't changed much in a very long time -- until AI entered the scene. Perplexity calls itself the world's first"answer engine"that useslarge language modelsto understand and give you direct, detailed responses to your questions. Traditional Google crawls the web and ranks results. This is exactly what Perplexity tried to do,facing the pressure. See full bio Barbara Pazur Contributor Barbara is a tech writer specializing in AI and emerging technologies. See full bio Barbara is a tech writer specializing in AI and emerging technologies