URL: https://www.guru99.com/flask-vs-django.html
Length: 8476 characters
--------------------------------------------------
Key Difference between Flask and Django Flask provides for APIs, while Django doesn’t have any for APIs. Flask does not dynamic HTML pages, and Django offers dynamic HTML pages. Flask is a Python web framework built for rapid development, whereas Django is built for easy and simple projects. Flask offers a diversified working style, while Django offers a monolithic working style. The URL dispatcher of the Flask web framework is a RESTful request; on the other hand, the URL dispatcher of the Django framework is based on controller-regex. Flask is a WSGI framework, while Django is a full-stack web framework. Differences between Flask and Django Here, I have analyzed the difference between Flask and Django and will comprehensively evaluate their pros and cons. What is Flask? Flask is a microframework offering the basic features of a web app. This framework has no dependencies on external libraries. The framework offers extensions for form validation, object-relational mappers, open authentication systems, up mechanisms, and several other tools. What is Django? Django is a web development framework for Python. This framework offers a standard method for fast and effective website development. It s you build and maintain quality web applications. It enables you to make the development process smooth and time-saving. It is a high-level web framework that allows for rapid development. The primary goal of this web framework is to create complex database-driven websites. Difference Between Flask and Django Flask and Django are the two most popular Python frameworks. From what I’ve observed, here are some important differences between Django and Flask. Flask vs Django Attributes Flask Django Launch Year Created in 2010 Created in 2005 Framework Type Flask is a WSGI framework. Django is a Full Stack Web Framework. Django doesn’t have any for API. Database Flask allows you to use multiple types of databases. Django doesn’t offer multiple types of databases. Forms Flask has no default for forms, but you can use WTForms to fill the gap. Django comes with a form that can be integrated with the ORM and the admin site. Dynamic HTML Flask does not offer dynamic HTML pages. Django offers dynamic HTML pages. Routing and Views The request based object is imported from the flask module, which is a global variable in Flask. All views are set as an individual parameter in the Django. Flexibility Flask is a much younger platform compared to Django. Django is a very mature framework. Working Style Flask offers a diversified working style. Django offers a monolithic working style. Control It s an extension that could be implemented in the framework. Django has its own module library. So, it stores several prewritten codes. Structure The structure of the project layout for the Flask web framework is random. The structure of the project layout in Django is conventional. Template Engine Flask web framework uses a Jinja2 template design. Django web framework s you utilize the View web templating system. URL Dispatcher URL dispatcher of the Flask web framework is a RESTful request. URL dispatcher of this Django framework is based on controller-regex. Bootstrapping Tool Flask does not offer a built-in bootstrapping tool. Django-admin enables developers to start building web applications without any external input. Project Layout Flask framework is suitable for single applications. Django framework allows developers to divide a project into multiple page applications. Third-Party App Flask Web Framework doesn’t offer for third-party applications. Django Web Framework s a large number of third-party applications. GitHub Stars GitHub Flask stars 66.3k GitHub Django stars 76.7k Best Features Best features of the flask are that it is lightweight, open source, and offers minimal coding for developing an application. The best features of Django are rapid development, open source, a great community, and being easy to learn. Companies Using Famous companies using Flask are: Netflix, Reddit, Lyft, and MIT. Famous companies using Django are , Coursera , Udemy. RELATED ARTICLES How to Python on Windows Enumerate() Function in Python: Loop, Tuple, String (Example) Polymorphism in Python with EXAMPLES Python List sort() with Examples Companies Using Flask Here is the list of companies that we know are using Flask. Netflix Patreon Zillow Reddit MIT Uber Lyft Airbnb Companies Using Django We have observed the following companies making use of Django: National Geographic Spotify Dropbox Pinterest NASA Mozilla Google Trends Flask vs Django Features of Flask Based on our extensive use, here are the important features of Flask: Integrated for unit testing. It is based on the Werkzeug toolkit. for secure s (client-side sessions). Google app engine compatibility. APIs are nicely shaped and coherent Easily deployable in production Features of Django I’d like to highlight the important features of Django based on what I’ve learned: Offers Model – View – Controller (MVC) Architecture. Predefined libraries for imaging, graphics, scientific calculations, etc. Cross-platform operating system. Site optimization across specialized servers for front-end tools like Ajax, jQuery, Pyjamas, etc. s multi-language and multi-characters. Stack Overflow Questions Flask vs. Django Advantages of Flask Here, let me highlight the pros of using Flask from my perspective. Higher compatibility with the latest technologies Technical experimentation Easier to use for simple cases Codebase size is relatively smaller High scalability for simple applications, Easy to build a quick prototype Routing URLs is easy Easy to develop and maintain applications Database integration is easy Small core and easily extensible Minimal yet powerful platform There are lots of resources available online, especially on GitHub Advantages of Django Here, I’m sharing the benefits of the Django framework: Django is easy to set up and run It provides an easy-to-use interface for various administrative activities. It offers multilingual websites by using its built-in internationalization system Django allows end-to-end application testing Allows you to document your API with an HTML output REST Framework has rich for several authentication protocols. It is used for rate-limiting API requests from a single user. s you define patterns for the URLs in your application Offers a built-in authentication system Cache framework comes with multiple cache mechanisms. High-level framework for rapid web development A complete stack of tools Data modeled with Python classes Disadvantage of Flask Here, I’d like to outline the downsides of Flask. Slower MVP development in most cases, Higher maintenance costs for more complex systems Complicated maintenance for larger implementations. Async may be a little problem Lack of database and ORM Setting up a large project requires some previous knowledge of the framework. Offers limited and a smaller community compared to Django Disadvantage of Django Here, I’ll outline the cons of the Django framework. Fewer design decisions and components. Compatibility with the latest technologies A higher entry point for simple solutions The larger size of the code Too bloated for small projects Underpowered templating and ORM Templates failed silently Auto reload restarts the entire server High learning curve Documentations does not cover real-world scenarios Only allows you to handle a single request per time. Routing requires some knowledge of regular expressions. Internal subcomponents coupling You can deploy components together, which can create confusion. How to Choose Between a Flask and a Django If you want a granular level of control, I recommend preferring Flask, while a Django developer like me relies on an extensive community to create unique websites. Django combined with the REST Framework s you build powerful APIs, whereas Flask requires more work, so there are high chances of making a mistake. The best method is to build a few basic CRUD apps with both frameworks and decide which framework fits your project style better. Flask is a microframework offering the basic features of a web app. Djangois a web development framework for Python. Flask and Django are the two most popular Python frameworks. Here, I have analyzed the difference between Flask and Django and will comprehensively evaluate their pros and cons. I’d like to highlight the important features of Django based on what I’ve learned: