URL: https://www.spiceupthecurry.com/aloo-bhindi-recipe/
Length: 10006 characters
--------------------------------------------------
Jump to Recipe Pin Recipe Aloo bhindi is easy to prepare and tastes incredibly delicious dry sabzi recipe. This is Punjabi style side dish goes well with roti or regular dal-chawal. ❤️ This Aloo Bhindi Recipe Simple & Easy: This aloo bhindi is a one-pot dish and super easy to make. Shallow fry the potatoes and okra separately. Then add into Punjabi style onion-tomato masala. Include into the weekly : Because this aloo bhindi is healthy, hearty and super satisfying dry veggie preparation, you can add this into your weekly. Whenever okra is in season, I make sure to make it at least once a week. Pack into lunch-box: This makes the excellent lunch-box when packed with roti or dal-rice. 🧾 Ingredient Notes Here is the pic of the ingredients you’ll need to make easy, tasty aloo bhindi fry. Please read the notes mentioned below. Okra: I always prefer to buy desi okra from the Indian grocery stores. These are long and thin with fewer seeds. The one you get in American stores is really thick and has bigger size seeds which I do not prefer. Always wash the okra and let it air dry completely before slicing. If in the rush then wipe it dry using a towel. Okra, knife and cutting board must be dry to keep the sliminess to a minimum. Also, keep wiping the knife with a paper towel at intervals while cutting. Potato: When it comes to Indian cooking, I prefer to use red skin potato or Yukon gold potatoes. I do not suggest using Idaho or russet potatoes. Spices: All of them are very basic and used in everyday Indian cooking, nothing fancy. Ginger garlic: Most of the time I prefer to freshly grate my ginger and garlic. Alternately you can use store-bought or made ginger garlic paste. 👩‍🍳 How To Make Aloo Bhindi? (Pics) 1) Heat 1 tablespoon of oil in a pan on medium heat. Once hot add bhindi, sprinkle some salt. 2) Cook uncovered until they get cooked and tender. Do stir once or twice in between. Okra gets darker in color and also shrinks as it cooks. Once they are cooked, there will not be any sliminess present. 3) In the same pan, heat 1 tablespoon of oil. 4) Roast until potatoes are knife tender. 5) Remove it to the same plate with okra. 6) In the same pan, heat the remaining 1 tablespoon of oil. Once hot add cumin seeds and let them sizzle a bit. 7) Then add chopped onions and sprinkle a little salt to speed up the cooking process. 8) Mix and cook until onions are soft and light pink in the color. Mix and saute for a minute or until the smell of ginger-garlic goes away. 10) Then add tomatoes (chopped or pureed). 11) Cook until all the moisture evaporates and it becomes thick. 12) Add turmeric powder, red chili powder, coriander powder, amchur and garam masala. 13) Mix and cook for 30-40 seconds. 14) Now add cooked bhindi and potatoes. 15) Mix and cook for 3-4 minutes until everything gets hot and flavors are combined. If not serving right away then keep aloo bhindi pan covered so it stays warm. 💭 Expert Tips For Making Aloo Bhindi Buying okra: They should be long, fresh looking and dark green in color. Don’t buy those who have blemishes, cut or leaked internal juice. Try to buy those who have fewer seeds in it. Avoid sliminess of the okra: 1) Okra should be dry before you chop them. 2) keep cleaning the knife as soon as it gets sticky. 3) While cooking okra stir only 2 or 3 times only. If you stir too many times, it gets slimy. 🍽 Serving Ideas For Aloo Bhindi Serve aloo bhindi with roti. Serve kachumber salad and chaas on the side. This can be served as a side dish with your everyday dal chawal, sambar rice or rasam rice. FAQs Why not cook okra and potatoes at the same time? Both require a different amount of time to cook. So by the time potatoes are ready, okra gets super soft and mushy. So it is better to cook separately. Can I cook okra and potatoes in the Air fryer? Yes, you can. This way aloo bhindi sabzi gets ready quickly. While these are cooking in the air fryer, make onion tomato masala on the stove. Preheat the air fryer to 350 ° F. For okra: 5 mins, toss, another 5 mins. For potatoes (depending on the size you cut): 15-20 mins, toss once in between cooking. Check Out Other Bhindi Recipes Bhindi masala Bhindi capsicum Kurkuri bhindi Bharwa bhindi Bhindi raita PS Tried this aloo bhindi recipe? Please leave a star rating in the recipe card below and/or a review in the comment section. I always appreciate your feedback! Aloo Bhindi Recipe 4.83 from 17 votes Print Pin Save Saved! Rate Aloo bhindi is easy to prepare and tastes incredibly delicious dry sabzi goes well with roti or regular dal-chawal. Kanan Prep Time 15 minutes mins Cook Time 30 minutes mins Total Time 45 minutes mins Serving Size 3 US measuring cups are used (1 cup = 240 ml) Cook Mode Prevent your screen from going dark Ingredients 3 cups Okra (Bhindi) , cut into ½ inch pieces 1 medium or 1 cup Potatoes , cut into pieces Salt to taste 3 tablespoons Oil 1 teaspoon Cumin seeds ½ cup Red onion , chopped finely ½ teaspoon Ginger paste or freshly grated or crushed ½ teaspoon Garlic paste or freshly grated 1 small or ½ cup Tomato , Chopped or pureed ¼ teaspoon Turmeric powder 1 teaspoon Coriander powder 1 teaspoons Red chili powder ½ teaspoon Garam masala ¼ teaspoon Amchur powder (Dried mango powder) Instructions Heat 1 tablespoon of oil in a pan on medium heat. Cook uncovered until they get cooked and tender. In the same pan, heat 1 tablespoon of oil. Roast until potatoes are knife tender. Remove it to the same plate with okra. In the same pan, heat the remaining 1 tablespoon of oil. Then add chopped onions and sprinkle a little salt to speed up the cooking process. Mix and cook until onions are soft and light pink in the color. Mix and saute for a minute or until the smell of ginger garlic goes away. Then add tomatoes (chopped or pureed). Cook until all the moisture evaporates and it becomes thick. Add turmeric powder, red chili powder, coriander powder, amchur and garam masala. Now add cooked bhindi and potatoes. Mix and cook for 3-4 minutes until everything gets hot and flavors are combined. If not serving aloo bhindi right away then keep it covered so it stays warm. Notes Buying okra: They should be long, fresh looking and dark green in color. Cook okra and potatoes in Airfryer While these are cooking in the air fryer, make onion tomato masala on the stove. Nutrition Calories: 236 kcal (12%) | Carbohydrates: 25 g (8%) | Protein: 4 g (8%) | Fat: 15 g (23%) | Saturated Fat: 1 g (5%) | Sodium: 414 mg (17%) | Potassium: 716 mg (20%) | Fiber: 6 g (24%) | Sugar: 4 g (4%) | Vitamin A: 1121 IU (22%) | Vitamin C: 42 mg (51%) | Calcium: 107 mg (11%) | Iron: 2 mg (11%) Did You Make This Recipe? I want to see! Be sure to tag me on ! Rate this Recipe Pin Recipe Tag on Insta 260 shares 77 Pinterest 183 WhatsApp Kanan Patel To understand the art and science of cooking, I’ve read many cookbooks and culinary books—and now I’m sharing all that experience with you. I started this b 2012 to share reliable vegetarian, Indian, and eggless baking recipes (with step-by-step photos and videos) that you can count on. 4.83 from 17 votes ( 5 ratings without comment ) Leave a Reply Cancel reply Your will not be published. Required fields are marked * Recipe Rating Recipe Rating Comment * Name * * Website Δ This site uses Akismet to reduce spam. Learn how your comment data is processed. 31 Comments काननजी, इत्तिफ़ाक़ों का कोई मतलब नहीं होता, मगर फिर भी मैं बता रहा हूँ। आज सवेरे माताजी ने भिंडी काटी हुई थी, मगर वो डाँवाडोल हो रही थीं। उन्होंने मुझसे कहा कि रोज़-रोज़ भिंडी खाएँगे क्या। मैंने कहा कि थोड़े अलग ढंग से बना लो, सिंधियों में जैसे भिंडी में आलू भी मिलाते हैं, वैसे कर लो। ये बोलते वक़्त ही मेरी नज़र अख़बार पर पड़ी, जहाँ आपकी आलू भिंडी मसाला की रैसिपी छपी हुई थी। वहाँ अंत में आपकी वैबसाइट का पता दे रखा था। तो माताजी ने आज आपकी रीति से भिंडी बनाई। और बहोत कामयाब बनी। क्या अख़बार वालों ने आपसे इजाज़त ली थी? शायद ली ही होगी। नहीं ली हो तो बता दूँ, आज 20/07/2022 के दैनिक भास्कर के मधुरिमा वाले पन्ने पर आपकी ये रैसिपी छपी है। Reply अच्छा लगा जानकर की आपको सब्जी पसंद आयी। पेपरवालो ने इजाजत नहीं ली थी तो मुझे पता नहीं था। और मैं अमरीका में हूँ तो पता नहीं है। क्या आप उसकी फोटो निकालकर e-मेल कर सकते है? spiceupthecurry@gmail.com Reply जी, भेज दिया है। Reply Thank you so much. Reply Jump to Recipe Pin Recipe Aloo bhindi is easy to prepare and tastes incredibly delicious dry sabzi recipe. Preheat the air fryer to 350°F.For okra:5 mins, toss, another 5 mins.For potatoes(depending on the size you cut): 15-20 mins, toss once in between cooking. To understand the art and science of cooking, I’ve read many cookbooks and culinary books—and now I’m sharing all that experience with you. Simple & Easy:This aloo bhindi is a one-pot dish and super easy to make. अच्छा लगा जानकर की आपको सब्जी पसंद आयी।पेपरवालो ने इजाजत नहीं ली थी तो मुझे पता नहीं था। और मैं अमरीका में हूँ तो पता नहीं है।क्या आप उसकी फोटो निकालकर e-मेल कर सकते है?spiceupthecurry@gmail.com 15) Mix and cook for 3-4 minutes until everything gets hot and flavors are combined. Both require a different amount of time to cook. Why not cook okra and potatoes at the same time? Both require a different amount of time to cook. Heat 1 tablespoon of oil in a pan on medium heat. Kanan Patel To understand the art and science of cooking, I’ve read many cookbooks and culinary books—and now I’m sharing all that experience with you. काननजी, इत्तिफ़ाक़ों का कोई मतलब नहीं होता, मगर फिर भी मैं बता रहा हूँ। आज सवेरे माताजी ने भिंडी काटी हुई थी, मगर वो डाँवाडोल हो रही थीं। उन्होंने मुझसे कहा कि रोज़-रोज़ भिंडी खाएँगे क्या। मैंने कहा कि थोड़े अलग ढंग से बना लो, सिंधियों में जैसे भिंडी में आलू भी मिलाते हैं, वैसे कर लो। ये बोलते वक़्त ही मेरी नज़र अख़बार पर पड़ी, जहाँ आपकी आलू भिंडी मसाला की रैसिपी छपी हुई थी। वहाँ अंत में आपकी वैबसाइट का पता दे रखा था। तो माताजी ने आज आपकी रीति से भिंडी बनाई। और बहोत कामयाब बनी। क्या अख़बार वालों ने आपसे इजाज़त ली थी? शायद ली ही होगी। नहीं ली हो तो बता दूँ, आज 20/07/2022 के दैनिक भास्कर के मधुरिमा वाले पन्ने पर आपकी ये रैसिपी छपी है।