URL: https://www.thecatholicthing.org/2025/07/17/the-meaning-of-life-2/
Length: 8023 characters
--------------------------------------------------
Listen to this article 6 min What is the meaning of life? I shall tell you. That life should have “meaning” is a distinctively modern concern. In the classical world, it was enough if a life were good, successful, and reasonable. We all strive for happiness, it was said: what could “meaning” possibly add? In the classical outlook, however, it was taken for granted that any natural reality, such as human life, inherently has a telos (i.e., an inherent end towards which it tends). Take away that telos and one looks for a meaning distinct from that thing. In a Christian culture, testimony to the truth becomes paramount, and therefore signs, such as the crucifix. Let us say that if something is such that it should point to something, then that to which it points, when it points as it should, is its “meaning.” The question of whether a human life has meaning is therefore the question of whether it is such as to point. A working weathervane points in the direction of the wind. A weathervane, then, by our definition has a meaning: its meaning is the wind’s direction. That is “the point of a weathervane.” It is necessary to qualify and say that something has meaning “if it is such that it should point,” because a weathervane might be broken, or impeded. In such cases, it still has a point, indeed, but it does not succeed in pointing. Human life is such that it should point, but we through sin and ignorance ruin it and impede it from pointing. Christ, however, is the Savior of life’s meaning as well. Christ makes even a life of sin and death a life that can point. And Christ endows us with new ways of pointing, too, in the “order of grace.” A human life can point, and therefore it can have meaning, in each of the three ways that anything at all can point to something else. First, something which is tending towards another points to that towards which it tends. An arrow, for instance, points to that towards which it was set flying. That is why an arrow on a sign means the direction to which the arrow would be flying, if it were a real arrow. We were made such that our hearts are restless until they rest in God. In creating us, God let us loose towards Himself. Therefore, by nature a human life is such as to point to that which gives it rest. But more than this, through deliberate choice we can make this fact ourselves salient, by living in such a way that it is clear that we take our final to be union with God and the peaceable communion of angels and saints. The clearest way of showing that a life tends to this goal, is by making sacrifices which would make no sense except for this goal. Newman calls these “ ventures of faith .” We might call them “pointers.” Those who sacrifice their very lives in this way are called “witnesses” by the Church, “martyrs.” A martyr is someone who by deliberate choice has saliently made Christ the meaning of his life. God the Geometer (God as Architect/Builder/Geometer/Craftsman. This is the Frontispiece of the Bible Moralisee, c. 1220–1230 Second, a part points to the whole of which it is a part. One vertebra found by a clever paleontologist signifies to him the whole dinosaur. An American in Paris stands for and represents his country, whether he wishes to or not. A footnote completes the meaning of a cited sentence by giving its full context. A human life can acquire meaning in this second way insofar it shows itself to be a part of, and therefore it points to, each of the three institutions of which it is meant to be a part. These are the natural institutions of country, family, and the supernatural institution of the Church. That is why an unchurched atheist, who conceives of himself as belonging to a global network mainly – and who is childless besides, and alienated from his parents – has completely deprived his life of this second kind of meaning. Third, that which resembles something, points to that which it resembles. A life of imitation is, to that extent, a life with meaning, since it points to what it imitates. We moderns ing for meaning have gotten it completely wrong. A novel life, summoned forth as an act of self-creation, if such were possible, would completely lack this kind of meaning. In the natural order one might have imitated a hero, a wise man, or a celebrated artisan. In the order of grace, Christians enjoy many possibilities. Each Christian can deliberately choose to live in such a way as to resemble Christ; each woman, Mary; each father, Joseph. Or we can imitate saints and founders: for example, every Dominican has made a deliberate decision that his life should point to Saint Dominic and “mean” that saint’s charism. That these are the three ways a life can have meaning is clear because a life can point either as a whole, a part, or as a member of a pair. But it is also clear from how people deny meaning, as for instance in the famous soliloquy from Macbeth: “all our yesterdays light the way to dusty death” – life points to no goal. “tomorrow and tomorrow and tomorrow” – an infinite repetition cannot serve as the part of anything else. “Life’s but a walking shadow” – there is nothing that a life resembles. After all, our fundamental holding is that the Word became flesh. “What does it profit a man to gain the whole world but to lose the meaning of his life?” Not simply, “See how they love one another!” But also “See how their lives point beyond themselves!” Progressivism is a heresy of pointing, either rubbing it out (same-sex unions, transgenderism) or supplanting the genuine with the spurious (DEI). A guide for pastoral prudence might be: Does this increase or diminish meaning? The Meaning of Life Michael Pakaluk Thursday, July 17, 2025 Listen to this article 6 min What is the meaning of life? I shall tell you. Vaverek Rediscovering Our Union with Christ Get the best Catholic commentary daily in your inbox. " * " indicates required fields * This field is for validation purposes and should be left unchanged. For reprint rights, write to: info@frinstitute.org The Catholic Thing is a forum for intelligent Catholic commentary. Opinions expressed by writers are solely their own. the Author Latest Articles Michael Pakaluk Michael Pakaluk, an Aristotle scholar and Ordinarius of the Pontifical Academy of St. Thomas Aquinas, is Professor of Political Economy in the Busch School of Business at the Catholic University of America. He lives in Hyattsville, MD with his wife Catherine, also a professor at the Busch School, and their children. His collection of essays, The Shock of Holiness (Ignatius Press) is now available. His book on Christian friendship, The Company We Keep , is forthcoming this fall from Scepter Press. He was a contributor to Natural Law: Five Views , published by Zondervan last May, and his most recent Gospel book came out with Regnery Gateway in March, Be Good Bankers: The Economic Interpretation of Matthew’s Gospel. Kolbe as Witness - Thursday, August 14, 2025 Some Ethics of Some AI - Friday, August 1, 2025 The Meaning of Life - Thursday, July 17, 2025 Today’s “Corban” is Social Security - Thursday, July 3, 2025 The Nicene ‘Symbol’ (Creed) - Thursday, June 19, 2025 Two Reflections on the Visitation - Saturday, May 31, 2025 Our Lord’s Languages of Love - Thursday, May 22, 2025 The God Within Her - Sunday, May 4, 2025 The Lord Loves You, But Does He Like You? - Thursday, March 27, 2025 Christmas in Lent - Thursday, March 13, 2025 The Meaning of Life Michael Pakaluk Thursday, July 17, 2025 Listen to this article 6 min What is the meaning of life? I shall tell you. In the classical outlook, however, it was taken for granted that any natural reality, such as human life, inherently has atelos(i.e., an inherent end towards which it tends). Take away thattelosand one looks for a meaning distinct from that thing. In a Christian culture, testimony to the truth becomes paramount, and therefore signs, such as the crucifix. Michael Pakaluk Michael Pakaluk, an Aristotle scholar and Ordinarius of the Pontifical Academy of St